<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: A Sketch of Mangogul’s Moral Philosophy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Sketch of Mangogul’s Moral Philosophy</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Mangogul, impatient to see the favorite again, slept little, arose earlier than usual, and was in her apartment before sun-rising. She had already rung the bell: a servant had just opened the curtains, and her women were preparing to dress her. The Sultan look’d narrowly around her, and seeing never a dog, he asked her the reason of this oddity. “I see,” answered Mirzoza, “that you think me singular in this article, but there is nothing in it.”</p>
			<p>“I assure you,” replied the Sultan, “that I see dogs about all the women of my court, and you will oblige me in informing me why they have them, or why you have none. Most of them have several, and not one of them but lavishes such caresses on her own, as she seems not to bestow on her lover without some difficulty. How come these beasts to deserve the preference? What use is made of them?”</p>
			<p>Mirzoza was puzzled at these questions: however, she made this answer. “To be sure, one keeps a dog as a parrot or a canary bird. It may be ridiculous to set one’s heart on these animals; but there is nothing wonderful in having them: they sometimes amuse, and never injure. If they are caressed, ’tis because such caresses are of no consequence. Besides, do you believe, prince, that a lover is satisfied with a kiss, such as a woman bestows on her pug-dog?”</p>
			<p>“Doubtless, I believe it,” says the Sultan. “By Jupiter the man must be very nice, who would not be satisfied.”</p>
			<p>One of Mirzoza’s women, who had gain’d the good will of the Sultan and his favorite by sweetness of temper, good parts, and zeal, said: “These animals are inconvenient and nasty: they dirty one’s clothes, spoil the furniture, tear laces, and do more mischief in a quarter of an hour, than would be sufficient to throw the most faithful lady’s woman into disgrace: and yet they are kept.”</p>
			<p>“Though, according to madam, they are good for nothing but that,” added the Sultan.</p>
			<p>“Prince,” said Mirzoza, “we stick to our fancies, and the keeping of dogs must be one, like many others, which would be no longer fancies, if we could give a reason for them. The reign of monkeys is past, the parrots still support themselves. Dogs fell, and now they rise again. Squirrels have had their time: and it is with animals, as it has successively been with Italian, English, geometry, farthingales, and furbelas.”</p>
			<p>“Mirzoza,” replied the Sultan, shaking his head, “has not all the knowledge that may be acquired on this subject; and the Toys⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is not your highness going to imagine,” said the favorite, “that you will be inform’d by Haria’s Toy, why that woman, who saw her son, one of her daughters, and her husband, die without shedding a tear, wept the loss of her lapdog for a whole fortnight.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” replied Mangogul.</p>
			<p>“Truly,” says Mirzoza, “if our Toys could explain all our whims, they would be more knowing than ourselves.”</p>
			<p>“Pray, who disputes that with you?” replied the Sultan. “For my part I believe that the Toy makes a woman do a hundred things, without her perceiving it: and I have remark’d on more occasions than one, that a woman, who thought she was following her head, was obeying her Toy. A great philosopher placed the soul, I mean ours, in the pineal gland. If I allowed women to have one, I well know where I would place it.”</p>
			<p>“I excuse you from informing me,” rejoin’d Mirzoza hastily.</p>
			<p>“But you will permit me at least,” said Mangogul, “to communicate some notions to you, which my ring has suggested to me concerning women, upon a supposition that they have a soul. The experiments, which I have made with my ring, have made me a great moralist. I have neither the wit of La Bruyere, nor the logic of Port Royal, nor the imagination of Montaigne, nor the wisdom of Charron: but I have collected facts, to which perhaps they were strangers.”</p>
			<p>“Speak, prince,” answered Mirzoza ironically, “I will hear you with all my ears. Moral essays of a Sultan of your age must be something curious.”</p>
			<p>“The system of Orcotomus is extravagant, with the leave of his fellow academician Hiragu: yet I find some sense in the answers which he gave to the objections started against it. If I allowed a soul to women, I would willingly suppose with him, that Toys have spoken from the beginning, but softly: and that the effect of the Genius Cucufa’s ring is reduced to raising their voice. Upon this foundation nothing can be more easy than to define the whole sex.</p>
			<p>“The sober woman, for example, would be she whose Toy is silent, or is not attended to.</p>
			<p>“The prude, she who pretends not to listen to her Toy.</p>
			<p>“The intriguing woman, she whose Toy desires a great deal, and who allows it too much.</p>
			<p>“The voluptuous, she who gives ear to her Toy with complaisance.</p>
			<p>“The courtesan, she on whom her Toy is making demands every moment, and who refuses it nothing.</p>
			<p>“The coquette, she whose Toy is mute, or is not attended to; but who gives hopes to all the men that come near her, that her Toy will speak one day or other, and it may happen that she will not lend it a deaf ear.</p>
			<p>“Well, delight of my soul, what do you think of my definitions?”</p>
			<p>“I think,” said the favorite, “that your highness has forgot the tender woman.”</p>
			<p>“If I have not mentioned her,” answered the Sultan, “ ’tis because I don’t know what the term means; and that some able men pretend, that the word tender, abstracting from all connection with the Toy, is void of sense.”</p>
			<p>“How, void of sense,” cried Mirzoza. “What! there is no medium then; and a woman must absolutely be a prude, an intriguer, a coquette, a voluptuous woman, or a libertin.”</p>
			<p>“Delight of my soul,” said the Sultan, “I am willing to own the inaccuracy of my enumeration, and will add the tender woman to the preceding characters; but on condition that you will furnish me with a definition of her, which will not coincide with any of mine.”</p>
			<p>“Most willingly,” said Mirzoza. “I hope to compass it without quitting your system.”</p>
			<p>“Let us see,” added Mangogul.</p>
			<p>“Well then,” replied the favorite⁠—“a tender woman is she⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Courage, Mirzoza,” said Mangogul.</p>
			<p>“Oh! I beg you won’t disturb me. The tender woman is she⁠—who has loved without a word utter’d by her Toy, or⁠—whose Toy has never spoke, but in favor of the single man whom she loved.”</p>
			<p>It would not have been polite in the Sultan to chicane the favorite, and ask her what she understood by love: wherefore he avoided it. Mirzoza took his silence for consent, and proceeded, proud of having extricated herself from a difficulty, which to her appeared considerable. “Ye men believe, because we do not argue in form, that we do not reason. Know once for all, that we could as easily discover the falsity of your paradoxes, as ye that of our reasonings, if we would give ourselves the trouble. If your highness was less in a hurry to satisfy your curiosity on the subject of lapdogs, I would in my turn give you a scrap of my philosophy. But it shall not be lost: I will reserve it for one of those days, that you will have more time to bestow on me.”</p>
			<p>Mangogul assured her that he had no better business, than to profit of her philosophical notions; that the metaphysics of a Sultana of twenty two, ought not to be less singular than the morals of a Sultan of his age.</p>
			<p>But Mirzoza apprehending that this was pure complaisance in Mangogul, begg’d some time to prepare, and thus gave the Sultan a pretext for flying whither his impatience might call him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
