<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLII: Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Fifth Trial of the Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Fifth Trial of the Ring</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Masquerade, and Sequel of the Masquerade</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The most extravagant Toys of Banza did not fail flocking whither pleasure called them. Some came in city-coaches, some in public vehicles, and some few on foot. “I should never finish,” says the African author, whose trainbearer I have the honour to be, “if I enter’d into a detail of the tricks which Mangogul play’d on them.” He gave more exercise to his ring that night alone, than it ever had had, since the Genius presented him with it. He turn’d it sometimes on one, sometimes on another, and frequently on twenty together; and then it was, that the noise they made was ravishing; One cried out with a squeaking voice, “Violins, pray give us <i xml:lang="fr">le Carillon de Dunkerque</i>;” another in a hoarse voice, “I will have the <span xml:lang="fr">Sautriots</span>;” “and I the <span xml:lang="fr">Tricotets</span>,” said a third: and a multitude at once call’d for old country-dances, such as <i xml:lang="fr">la Bourée, les quatre faces, la Calotine, la Chaine, le Pistolet, la Mariée, le Pistolet, le Pistolet, le Pistolet</i>. All these cries were interlarded with a million of extravagances. On one side was heard: <em>Plague take the noodle, let him be sent to school.</em> On another, <em>Must I return then without my earnest?</em> Here, <em>who pays my coach</em>? There, <em>he has slipt away from me, but I’ll hunt him till I find him.</em> And again, <em>till tomorrow; but twenty Louis’s at least, or there’s nothing to be done.</em> And everywhere in short, speeches, which expressed desires or exploits.</p>
			<p>In the crowd, a citizen’s daughter, young and pretty, singled out Mangogul, pursued him, and provoked him so, that he turned his ring on her. Then was her Toy heard to cry out: “Why do you fly me? Stop, charming mask, be not insensible to the ardor of a Toy, which burns for you.” The Sultan shock’d at this rash declaration, was determined to punish the forward creature. He disappear’d, and sought among his guards someone who was pretty much of his make, gave him his mask and Domino, and abandoned him to the pursuits of the little female cit; who being still deceived by appearances, continued to say a thousand ridiculous things to him, whom she took for Mangogul.</p>
			<p>The sham Sultan was no fool, he was one of those who could talk by signs: he made one, which drew the Belle into a lonesome place, where, for above an hour, she imagined herself the favorite Sultana, and God knows what mighty projects were working in her brain. But the enchantment lasted not long. After she had surfeited the pretended Sultan with caresses, she pray’d him to unmask; which he did, and showed a physiognomy armed with a large pair of whiskers, which did not belong to Mangogul. “Oh! fie,” cried the little wench, “fie⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Fell mine little Shoul,” answered the Swiss, “fat you ail? Me tought mee done you kood services enof, dat you no be angry at nowing mee.” But his goddess, without answering him, slipt nimbly through his hands, and was lost in the crowd.</p>
			<p>But even such of the Toys as did not aspire to so great honours, did not fail of lighting on pleasure: and they all took the road back to Banza, thoroughly satisfied with their journey.</p>
			<p>As the company was withdrawing, Mangogul overheard two of his principal officers at high words. “She is my mistress,” says one, “I have kept her these twelve months, and you are the first who has taken it into his head to tread on my heels. Why do you make me uneasy? Nasses, my friend, apply elsewhere; you will find a hundred lovely women, who will think themselves too happy to possess you.”</p>
			<p>“I love Amina,” replied Nasses. “I see none but her, who takes my fancy. She has given me hopes, and you will give me leave to pursue them.”</p>
			<p>“Hopes!” replied Alibeg.</p>
			<p>“Yes, hopes⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Zounds, that is not⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I tell you, Sir, that it is, and I expect satisfaction this moment for the lie you give me.” Down they went immediately into the court yard; their scimitars were already drawn, and they were on the point of ending their dispute in a tragical manner, when the Sultan stop’d them, and forbid them to fight, before they had consulted their <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Helena</i>.</p>
			<p>They obeyed, and went to Amina’s house, and Mangogul close after them. “The ball has quite spent me,” said she: “my eyes are dropping out of my head. You are very cruel folks, to come the moment I was ready to get into bed: but both of ye look very oddly. May I be informed what brings ye hither?”⁠</p>
			<p>“A trifle,” replied Alibeg. “This gentleman boasts, and even loftily,” added he, showing his friend, “that you give him hopes. Madam, how stands this matter?”⁠—Amina was opening her mouth, but the Sultan turning his ring that very instant, she closed it, and her Toy answered for her.</p>
			<p>“In my opinion Nasses is mistaken: no, it is not he that madam chooses. Has he not a lusty footman who is a better man? Oh! how foolish these men are in imagining that dignities, honours, titles, names, words void of meaning, impose on Toys. Everyone has his own philosophy, and ours consists in distinguishing personal merit, true merit, from that which is but imaginary. With Monsieur de Claville’s leave, he knows less of that subject than we; which I will prove.</p>
			<p>“You are both acquainted,” continued the Toy, “with the marchioness Bibicosa. You know her amours with Cleandor, as also her disgrace, and the high devotion she professes at this day. Amina is a good friend; she has constantly kept up her former intimacy with Bibicosa, and has not ceased frequenting her house, where all sorts of Bramins are met with. On a certain day one of these pressed my mistress to speak to Bibicosa in his favor. ‘Pray, what would you have me ask of her?’ replied Amina. ‘She is a drowned woman, who can do nothing for herself. To be sure, she will be much obliged to you for treating her still as a person of consequence. Believe me, my friend, prince Cleandor and Mangogul will never do anything for her, and you may freeze in the antechambers.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘But, madam,’ replied the Bramin, ‘the affair is but a trifle, which entirely depends on the marchioness: and this it is. She has built a little chapel in her house, doubtless for the Sala, which supposes an Iman: and ’tis this place which I ask.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘What say you?’ says Amina. ‘An Iman: you don’t consider: the marchioness wants only a Marabou, whom she will call from time to time, when it rains, or when she chooses to have the Sala, before she goes to bed: but an Iman lodged, clothed, dieted in her house, with a salary, does not suit Bibicosa. I know her affairs. The poor woman has not six thousand Zecchins a year, and you expect her to give two thousand of it to an Iman. Surely this is a strange fancy.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘By Brama,’ replied the holy man, ‘I am sorry for it: for if I had once got to be her Iman, I should soon become more necessary to her; and when one is got thus far, it rains gold and pensions. Howsoever I may appear to you, I am of Monomotapa, and do my duty extremely well.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Upon second thoughts,’ answered Amina, with panting interruptions, ‘your affair is not perhaps impossible. Pity it is, that the merit you speak of is not known.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘One runs no risk in doing good offices to persons of my country,’ replied the Monomotapan, ‘pray behold.’⁠—He forthwith gave Amina a complete proof of such surprising merit, that from that moment you lost in her eyes half the value she put on you. Well! long live the Monomotapans.”</p>
			<p>Alibeg and Nasses made long faces, and look’d on each other without uttering a word: but when they had recovered from their astonishment, they mutually embraced; and casting disdainful looks on Amina, they ran prostrate themselves at the Sultan’s feet, and thank him for having undeceived them with regard to this woman, and preserved their lives and reciprocal friendship. They arrived just as Mangogul, return’d to the favorite, was relating Amina’s history to her. It made Mirzoza laugh, but did not augment her esteem for the court ladies and the Bramins.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
