<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV: Twelfth Trial of the Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Twelfth Trial of the Ring</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">A Law Case</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Rapes were severely punished in Congo: and there happened a most notorious one in Mangogul’s reign. This prince, at his accession to the crown, had sworn, like all his predecessors, never to grant a pardon for that crime: but be laws ever so severe, they seldom curb those, whom a considerable advantage urges to infringe them. The criminal was condemned to lose that part of him, by which he had sinned; a cruel operation, of which he generally died; as the person who performed it, used less precaution than B⁠⸺⁠ll.</p>
			<p>Kerfael, a young man of a good family, had now languished six months in a dungeon, waiting for the day of execution. Fatme, a young pretty woman, was his Lucretia and accuser. Everybody knew, that they had been very well together: Fatme’s indulgent husband took no exceptions against it: therefore it would be ungenteel in the public to intermeddle in their affairs.</p>
			<p>After an undisturbed commerce of two years, whether thro’ inconstancy or disgust, Kerfael took to a dancer at the opera of Banza, and grew cold towards Fatme, yet without coming to an open rupture. He resolved to make a decent retreat; which obliged him to continue his visits in the house. Fatme enraged for being thus forsaken, meditated revenge, and made use of this remnant of his assiduities to destroy her unfaithful lover.</p>
			<p>One day, that the convenient husband had left them tête-à-tête, and that Kerfael, having ungirt his scimitar, was endeavouring to allay Fatme’s suspicions by protestations, which cost nothing to lovers, but never surprise the credulity of a jealous woman; she assumed an affrighted air, and having tore her dress at five or six pulls, shriek’d out horridly, and call’d to her husband and domestics for help; who ran immediately, and became witnesses to the injury, which Fatme said she received from Kerfael; and showing the scimitar, added: “This the infamous villain lifted at my head ten times to make me submit to his will.”</p>
			<p>The young man, struck dumb at the blackness of the accusation, had not power either to answer or make his escape. He was seiz’d, dragg’d to prison, and deliver’d up to justice and the prosecution of the Cadilesker.</p>
			<p>The laws ordained that Fatme should be visited. Accordingly she was; and the report of the matrons proved very unfavourable to the accused. They had an original standard, by which they could determine the condition of a violated woman; and every circumstance concurred against Kerfael. The judges examined him, Fatme was confronted with him, and the evidence was heard. In vain did he plead innocence, deny the fact, and demonstrate by the commerce which he held with his accuser above two years, that she was not a woman to be ravished. The circumstance of the scimitar, the tête-à-tête solitude, Kerfael’s confusion at the sight of the husband and domestics; taken all together formed, in the opinion of the judges, violent presumptions. Fatme on her side, far from owning that she had granted him favors, would not even allow that she gave him the least glimmering of hopes; and maintain’d that her obstinate adherence to her duty, from which she had never flinch’d, was without doubt what urged Kerfael to acquire by force, what he despair’d obtaining by craft. The verbal process drawn up by the commissaries was another terrible piece. Nothing more was requisite, than to run it over, and compare it with the articles of the Criminal Code, to read unhappy Kerfael’s condemnation therein. He lost all expectations of life either by his defence, or the credit of his family; the magistrates had fixed the definitive sentence to the thirteenth of the month of Rebeg: and this was even published by sound of trumpet, according to custom.</p>
			<p>This affair became the topic of conversations, and people were divided upon it for a good while. Some old hags, who had always been very safe from any apprehensions of a rape, ran about crying: “That Kerfael’s attack was enormous; that unless a severe example were made of him, innocence would be no longer in security; and that an honest woman would be exposed to insults, even at the horns of the Altar.” Then they cited instances of little impertinent puppies having attack’d the virtue of several respectable ladies: and the circumstances left no room to doubt, but that those respectable ladies mentioned by them were themselves: and all these speeches were made to Bramins less innocent than Kerfael, and by devotes as chaste as Fatme, by way of edifying conversations.</p>
			<p>The Petits-Maîtres on the contrary, and even some Petites-Maîtresses, asserted that a rape was a chimaera, that a woman never surrendered but by capitulation; and that, if a fort was defended, though ever so little, it was absolutely impossible to take it by storm. Examples were alleged in support of this reasoning: the women knew some; the Petits-Maîtres invented others; and there was no end of quoting instances of women, who had not been ravished. “Poor Kerfael,” said they, “what the devil had he in his head, to take to little Bimbreloqua,” which was the dancer’s name, “why did he not stick to Fatme? They were extremely well together, and the husband left them at full liberty: what a blessing⁠—Those witches the matrons put on their spectacles to no purpose, for they saw nothing. And indeed, who is the person that can see clear in that place? And besides, the senators are going to deprive him of his joy, for having burst an open door. The poor lad will die of it, no doubt. After that, pray consider, what will not dissatisfied women be authorized to do.”</p>
			<p>“If this execution takes place,” interrupted another, “I will make myself a freemason.”</p>
			<p>Mirzoza, naturally compassionate, remonstrated to Mangogul, who was joking her on Kerfael’s case, that if the laws spoke against Kerfael, good sense deposed against Fatme. “Moreover,” added she, “it has never been heard, that, in a wise government, the letter of the law should be so closely adhered to, that the simple allegation of a female accuser should be sufficient to endanger the life of a subject. The reality of a rape cannot be too clearly proved; and you will allow, Sir, that this fact is as much at least within the province of your ring as of your senators. It would be very singular, that the matrons should be more knowing on this head than the Toys themselves. Hitherto your highness’s ring has done little more than satisfy your curiosity. Might not the Genius, from whom you had it, have intended some more important end? If you employ it for the discovery of truth, and the happiness of your subjects, can you think the Genius will be offended? Try. You are in possession of an infallible method of drawing from Fatme a confession of her crime, or a proof of her innocence.”</p>
			<p>“You are in the right,” replied Mangogul, “and you shall be satisfied.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan departed immediately: and indeed there was no time to lose: for it was the night of the twelfth of the moon Rebeg, and the senate was to pronounce sentence on the thirteenth. Fatme was just got into bed, the curtains were not quite closed. A night taper threw a dull light on her countenance. The Sultan thought her beautiful, notwithstanding the violent commotions which disfigured her. Compassion and hatred, grief and revenge, audaciousness and shame were painted in her eyes, according as they succeeded each other in her heart. She uttered deep sighs, shed tears, wiped them off, shed fresh ones, remained some moments with her head drooping and eyes dejected, then suddenly raised them, and darted furious looks towards the heavens. What was Mangogul doing all this time? He was talking to himself, and saying. “These are the symptoms of despair. Her former tenderness for Kerfael has revived in all its violence. She has lost sight of the offence he committed, and has nothing in view but the punishment reserved for her lover.” As soon as he had finished these words, he turned the fatal ring on Fatme, and her Toy cried out with vehemence.</p>
			<p>“Twelve hours more, and we shall be revenged. The treacherous ingrateful man shall perish, and his blood shall be shed.” Fatme affrighted at the extraordinary motion which she felt within her, and shock’d at the buzzing voice of her Toy, clapt both hands on it, and put herself upon duty to stop its mouth. But the powerful ring continued to act, and the ungovernable Toy breaking thro’ every obstacle, added: “Yes, we shall be revenged. O! thou who hast betray’d me, wretched Kerfael, die, and thou, whom he has preferred to me, O Bimbreloqua, despair!⁠—Twelve hours more! Alas! how tedious will this time appear to me. Hasten, sweet moments, when I shall see the treacherous, the ingrateful Kerfael under the executioner’s knife, his blood trickling down⁠—Ah! Wretch, what have I said? Can I without horror see the dearest object of my love perish? Can I see the fatal weapon lifted up?⁠—Ah! far from me this cruel thought.⁠—He hates me, ’tis true; he has quitted me for Bimbreloqua, but perhaps some time or other⁠—why do I say, perhaps? Love will certainly recall him under my yoke. That little Bimbreloqua is a fancy that will fly off; he must sooner or later be sensible of the injustice of his preference, and the ridiculousness of his new choice. Comfort thyself, Fatme, thou shalt see thy Kerfael again. Yes, thou shalt see him again. Arise quickly, run, fly to remove the dreadful danger which threatens him. Dost thou not tremble to come too late?⁠—But whither shall I run, mean wretch that I am. Does not Kerfael’s disdain foretell me, that he has abandoned me forever. Bimbreloqua enjoys him, and ’tis for her that I was going to save him: ah! let him rather die a thousand deaths. If he lives no more for me, why should I be concerned for his death?⁠—Yes, I am now convinced that my wrath is just. The ingrateful Kerfael has deserved all my hatred. I no longer have any remorse. I had done everything to keep him, I will do everything to destroy him. Yet one day later, and my revenge was disappointed. But his evil genius delivered him up to me, the very moment that he thought to escape me. He is fallen into the snare which I laid for him. I have him fast. The appointment, to which I contrived to bring thee, was the last which thou intendedst for me: but thou wilt not so soon forget it.⁠—With what address did you bring him to your beck? Fatme, how well concerted was your disorder? Your shrieks, your grief, your tears, your confusion, everything, even to your silence, has ruin’d Kerfael. Nothing can snatch him from his impending fate. Kerfael is dead⁠—You weep, wretched woman. He loved another, of what consequence is his life to you.”</p>
			<p>Mangogul, filled with horror at this discourse, turned off his ring; and while Fatme was recruiting her spirits, he flew back to the Sultana. “Well, prince,” said she, “what have you heard? Is Kerfael still guilty, and the chast Fatme⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beseech you to excuse me,” answered the Sultan, “from repeating the abominations which I come from hearing. How an exasperated woman is to be dreaded! Who could believe, that a body formed by the graces, sometimes enclosed a heart molded by the furies? But the sun shall not set tomorrow on my dominions, before they be purged of a monster more dangerous than those which are produced in my deserts.”</p>
			<p>The Sultan immediately sent for the Seneschal, and commanded him to seize Fatme, to remove Kerfael into one of the apartments of the seraglio, and to inform the Senate, that he reserved to himself the cognizance of his affair. His orders were executed that very night.</p>
			<p>The next morning at dawn of day, the Sultan attended by the Seneschal and an Effendi, went to Mirzoza’s apartment, and had Fatme brought thither. This unfortunate woman threw herself at Mangogul’s feet, confessed her crime with all its circumstances, and conjured Mirzoza to intercede for her. Meanwhile Kerfael was conducted in. He expected nothing but death: however he made his appearance with that composed assurance, which innocence alone can give. Some ill-natured wags said, that he would be in greater consternation, if what he was threaten’d to lose, was worth preserving. The women were upon the tenters to know the issue. He prostrated himself respectuously before his highness. Mangogul made him a signal to arise, and giving him his hand, “You are innocent,” said he, “be free. Render thanks to Brama for your preservation. In order to make amends for the misery you have suffered, I grant you a pension of two thousand sequins on my exchequer, and the first commandery that shall fall in the order of the Crocodile.”</p>
			<p>The more favors were bestowed on Kerfael, the more Fatme dreaded punishment. The great Seneschal gave his opinion for death, grounded upon the law: <i xml:lang="la">Si foemina <abbr>ff.</abbr> de vi <abbr>C.</abbr> calumniatrix</i>. The Sultan was inclined for perpetual imprisonment. Mirzoza finding too much rigor in one of these judgments, and too much indulgence in the other, condemned Fatme’s Toy to the padlock. The Florentine machine was publicly clapt on, upon the same scaffold that had been erected for Kerfael’s execution. Thence she was conducted to a house of correction, together with the matrons who had given their decisive opinions with so much knowledge.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
