<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: Seventh Trial of the Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Seventh Trial of the Ring</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">The Stifled Toy</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Tho’ the female cits of Banza doubted whether Toys of their rank would be honoured with the gift of speech; yet they all furnish’d themselves with muzzles. In Banza muzzles became as common, as a general court mourning in this country.</p>
			<p>Here the African author observes with astonishment, that neither the lowness of the price, nor the commonness of muzzles put them out of fashion in the Seraglio. “This once,” says he, “utility got the better of prejudice.” So trite a reflection was not worth the pains of repeating: but to me it seems as if it was the defect of all the ancient authors of Congo, to fall into repetitions; whether they thereby hoped to give a greater air of truth and facility to their productions; or that they were far from having as much fecundity of invention as their admirers ascribe to them.</p>
			<p>However that be, one day Mangogul, walking in his gardens, attended by his whole court, took the maggot to level his ring at Zelais. She was handsome, and suspected of several adventures: yet her Toy did no more than stammer, and utter’d only some few mangled words, which had no meaning, and which the Blasters interpreted as they thought fit.⁠—”Pshuh!” says the Sultan, “here is a Toy that has a vast impediment of speech. Most certainly there must be somewhat that impedes its respiration.” Wherefore he applied his ring more intensely. The Toy made a second effort to speak; and in some measure surmounting the obstacle, that stop’d its mouth, these words were heard very distinctly. “Alas! alas!⁠—I am⁠—I am⁠—I am stifled. I can no more.⁠—Alas! alas! I am stifled.”</p>
			<p>Immediately Zelais found herself going: she grew pale, her neck swell’d, and she fell, with her eyes shut and mouth half open, between the arms of those who stood around her.</p>
			<p>Any where else Zelais would have been speedily relieved. ’Twas only debarrassing her of her muzzle, and allowing her Toy a freedom of respiration: but how to lend the helping hand in Mangogul’s presence. “Quick, quick, physicians,” cried the Sultan, “Zelais is dying.”</p>
			<p>Some pages ran to the palace, and returned, with the doctors gravely marching after them. Orcotomus was at their head. Some gave their opinion for bleeding, others for the <i>kermes mineral</i>; but the penetrating Orcotomus ordered Zelais to be carried to a neighbouring closet, examined her, and cut the braces of her harness. This muzzled Toy was one of those, which he boasted to have seen in the paroxysm.</p>
			<p>However, the bloating was excessive, and Zelais would have continued to suffer, had not the Sultan had pity on her condition. He turn’d off his ring, the fluids return’d to their equilibrium. Zelais came to herself, and Orcotomus assumed the honour of this miraculous cure.</p>
			<p>Zelais’s accident and her physician’s indiscretion, made the muzzles lose much of their credit. Orcotomus, without any regard to Eolipila’s interest, proposed to himself to raise his own fortune on the ruins of the others; advertised himself as a patentee physician of Toys that had caught cold: and some of his bills are to be seen at this day in the by-streets. He began by getting money, and ended by falling into contempt. The Sultan took pleasure in lowering the presumption of the empiric. Did Orcotomus boast of silencing a Toy that had never utter’d a word? Mangogul had the cruelty to make it speak. People went so far as to remark, that any Toy that was tired of silence, need only have two or three visits from Orcotomus. In a little time he was rank’d with Eolipila in the class of quacks; and they will both continue therein, until it shall please Brama to take them out.</p>
			<p>Shame was preferred to the apoplexy. “The one kills,” said the women, “the other does not.” Wherefore they renounced their muzzles; let their Toys talk on; and no body died thereby.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
