<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: Mangogul’s Dangerous Temptation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Mangogul’s Dangerous Temptation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Scarcely was Mangogul in possession of Cucufa’s mysterious ring, when he was tempted to make the first trial of it on the favorite. I forgot to mention, that besides the virtue of obliging the Toys of those women, on whom he turn’d the stone, to speak, it had that also of rendering the person invisible, who wore it on the little finger. Thus could Mangogul transport himself in the twinkling of an eye to a thousand places where he was not expected, and with his own eyes see many things, which are frequently transacted without witnesses. He had nothing more to do than to put on his ring, and say “I desire to be in such a place,” and he was there in an instant. Behold him then in Mirzoza’s bedchamber.</p>
			<p>Mirzoza, who gave over all hopes of the Sultan’s company, was in bed. Mangogul approach’d her pillow softly, and saw by the glimmering light of a night taper, that she was asleep. “Good,” say he, “she sleeps, let us quickly shift the ring on another finger, resume our natural shape, turn the stone on this fair sleeper, and awake her Toy a little while.⁠—But what stops me?⁠—I tremble.⁠—Is it possible that Mirzoza?⁠—No, it is not possible, Mirzoza is faithful to me. Fly from me, injurious suspicions, I will not, I ought not to heed ye.” He said, and put his fingers on the ring: but taking them off as hastily as if it had been fire, he cried within himself. “What do I do, wretched man! I insult Cucufa’s advice. For the sake of satisfying a silly curiosity, I am going to run the hazard of losing my mistress and my life. If her Toy should be in the humor of talking extravagantly, I should never see her more, and I should die of grief. And who knows what a Toy may have in its soul?” Mangogul’s agitation made him in some measure forget himself: he pronounced these last words pretty loud, and the favorite awoke.</p>
			<p>“Ah, Prince,” said she, less surprised than charmed at his presence, “you are here. Why did you not send me notice? Must you condescend to wait for my awaking?”</p>
			<p>Mangogul answered the favorite by relating the success of his interview with Cucufa, show’d her the ring, and did not conceal one of its properties from her. “Ah! what a diabolical secret has he given you!” cry’d Mirzoza. “But pray, Prince, do you intend to make any use of it.”</p>
			<p>“How,” said the Sultan, “do I intend to use it? I shall begin by you, if you argue with me.” At these terrible words the favorite turn’d pale, trembled, recover’d herself, and conjured the Sultan by Brama, and all the Pagodas of the Indies and Congo, not to try the experiment on her of a secret power, which indicated a diffidence of her fidelity.</p>
			<p>“If I have been constantly honest,” continued she, “my Toy will not speak a word, and you will have done me such an injury as I shall never forgive. If it happens to speak, I shall lose your esteem and heart, and that will make you run distracted. Hitherto you have, in my opinion, found your account in our connection; why would you run the risk of breaking it off? Prince, believe me. Follow the advice of the Genius; he has had great experience, and advices of Genius are always good to follow.”</p>
			<p>“This is exactly what I was saying to myself,” answered Mangogul, “when you awoke. And yet if you had slept two minutes longer, I cannot answer for what might have happened.”</p>
			<p>“What would have happened,” says Mirzoza, “is, that my Toy would have given you no information, and that you would have lost me forever.”</p>
			<p>“That may be,” replied Mangogul; “but now that I have a full view of the danger which I incurred, I solemnly swear to you by the eternal Pagoda, that you shall be excepted from the number of those, on whom I shall turn the ring.”</p>
			<p>At these words Mirzoza brightened up, and fell to joking at the expense of the Toys which the Prince should hereafter interrogate. “Cydalisa’s Toy,” said she, “has many stories to tell, and if it be as indiscreet as its mistress, it will not require much intreaty. Haria’s Toy is no longer of this world, and your highness will obtain no tales from it of fresher date than the days of my grandmother. As for that of Glauce, I believe it is a proper one to be consulted. She is a coquet and pretty.”</p>
			<p>“And for that reason precisely it is,” replied the Sultan, “that her Toy will be mute.”</p>
			<p>“Why then,” said the Sultana, “apply to that of Phedima, she is ugly, and loves gallantry.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” continued the Sultan; “and so ugly, that one must be as ill-natured as you, to accuse her of gallantry. Phedima is sober; ’tis I who say it, and who know something of the matter.”</p>
			<p>“As sober as you please,” replied the favorite, “but she has a sort of grey eyes that speak the contrary.”</p>
			<p>“Her eyes belie her,” said the Sultan warmly. “You tire my patience with your Phedima. Might not one say, that there is no other Toy but this to examine.”</p>
			<p>“But may I presume, without offending your highness,” added Mirzoza, “to ask which is the first you intend to honour with your choice.”</p>
			<p>“We shall see anon,” said Mangogul, “in the circle of the Manimonbanda, (the Congese name of the great Sultana). We shall have a good deal of work upon our hands and when we happen to be tired of the Toys of my court, we may chance make a tour thro’ Banza. Possibly we may find those of the city women more reasonable than those of dutchesses.”</p>
			<p>“Prince,” said Mirzoza, “I have some acquaintance with the former, and can assure you, that they are only more circumspect.”</p>
			<p>“We shall soon hear from them: but I cannot refrain from laughter,” continued Mangogul, “when I think on the confusion and surprise of these women at the first words of their Toys, ha, ha, ha! Remember, delight of my soul, that I shall expect you at the great Sultana’s, and that I shall make no use of my ring till you are come.”</p>
			<p>“Prince,” said Mirzoza, “I rely on the promise you have made me.” Mangogul smiled at her alarm, reiterated his promise, sealed them with kisses, and retired.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
