<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII: Fifth Trial of the Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Fifth Trial of the Ring</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Play</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Most of the ladies who made the party with the Manimonbanda, play’d with great eagerness; and it was not necessary to have Mangogul’s sagacity, to perceive it. The passion of gaming is one of those that puts on the least disguise. It shows itself, whether in winning or losing, by strong symptoms. “But whence proceeds this fury?” said he within himself. “How can the ladies bear to pass whole nights round a Pharaoh table, to tremble in expectation of an ace or a seven? This frenzy injures their health and beauty, when they have any: without reckoning the disorders into which I am sure it precipitates them. I have a great desire,” said he to Mirzoza in the ear, “to execute here a thought just come into my head.”</p>
			<p>“And what is this fine thought, which you meditate?” said the favorite.</p>
			<p>“It is,” answered Mangogul, “to turn my ring on the most unbridled of these brelandiers, to interrogate her Toy, and to transmit by that organ, a good advice to all those weak husbands, who allow their wives to stake the honour and fortune of their house on a card or a die.”</p>
			<p>“I like this notion mightily,” replied Mirzoza; “but know, Prince, that the Manimonbanda has just now sworn by her Pagodas, that she would keep no more drawing-room nights, if ever she found herself again exposed to the impudence of Engastrimuthes.”</p>
			<p>“What have you said, my soul’s delight?” interrupted the Sultan.</p>
			<p>“I have,” answered the favorite, “made use of the name, which the modest Manimonbanda gives to all those, whose Toys have the faculty of speech.”</p>
			<p>“It is of the invention of her stupid Bramin, who values himself upon knowing the Greek, and being ignorant of the Congese language,” replied the Sultan. “However, with the Manimonbanda’s leave, and that of her chaplain too, I would desire to question Manilla’s Toy; and it would be proper to make the interrogatories here, for the edification of the neighbours.”</p>
			<p>“Prince,” said Mirzoza, “if you take my word, you will spare the Manimonbanda the uneasiness this proceeding must give her: which you may do, without balking your own curiosity or mine. Why do you not go to Manilla’s house?”</p>
			<p>“I will go, since you advise,” said Mangogul.</p>
			<p>“But at what hour?” said the Sultana.</p>
			<p>“About midnight,” answered the Sultan.</p>
			<p>“At midnight she is at play,” said the favorite.</p>
			<p>“I will put off my visit then till two in the morning,” replied Mangogul.</p>
			<p>“Prince, you don’t consider,” rejoined the favorite: “ ’tis the most pleasant hour of the four and twenty for female gamesters. If your highness will be led by me, you will take Manilla in her first sleep, between seven and eight.”</p>
			<p>Mangogul followed Mirzoza’s advice, and visited Manilla about seven. Her women were going to put her to bed. He judged by the sadness predominant in her countenance, that she had play’d with bad luck. She walk’d to and fro, stopp’d, lifted her eyes to heaven, stamp’d with her foot, cover’d her eyes with her hands, and muttered somewhat, which the Sultan could not understand. Her women, who were undressing her, followed all these motions in panics; and if they at length compassed getting her into bed, it was not done without receiving harsh language and something worse. Now Manilla is in bed, having made no other night prayer, but some curses against a damned ace, which came seven times successively to her loss. Scarcely had she closed her eyes, when Mangogul levell’d his ring at her. Instantly her Toy exclaimed in a sorrowful tone: “Now I am repiqued and capotted.” The Sultan smiled to hear that everything about Manilla, even to her Toy, spoke gaming. “No,” continued the Toy, “I will never play against Abidul: he knows nothing but tricking. Speak to me no more of Dares: with him one runs the risk of some unlucky hits. Ismal is a pretty fair player, but everybody has him not that would. Mazulim was a treasure, before he fell into the hands of Crissa. I don’t know a more whimsical player than Zulmis. Rica is less so; but the poor lad is run dry. What can one do with Lazuli? The prettiest woman of Banza could not make him play high. What a piddling player Mollius is! In truth, desolation has spread among the gamesters: and e’er long we shall not know with whom to make a party.”</p>
			<p>After this Jeremiad, the Toy fell to relating uncommon strokes, of which it had been a witness; and excessively extoll’d the constancy and resources of its mistress in bad luck.</p>
			<p>“Were it not for me,” it said, “Manilla would have ruin’d herself twenty times over. All the Sultan’s treasures would not have discharged the debts that I have paid. In one match at brelan she lost to a farmer of the revenue and an abbé, above ten thousand ducats. She had nothing left but her jewels: but her husband had so lately redeem’d them, that she dared not to venture them. Nevertheless she took the cards, and had one of those seducing hands, which fortune sends, when she is on the point of cutting your throat. They urged her to speak. Manilla look’d at her cards, put her hand into her purse, whence she was sure to pull nothing, return’d to her cards, examined them again, but without determining.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Does madam stand it at last?’ said the farmer.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Yes; I stake,’ said she⁠—‘I stake⁠—I stake my Toy.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘For what value?’ replied Turcares.</p>
			<p>“ ‘For a hundred ducats,’ said Manilla. The abbé withdrew, esteeming the Toy too high rated. Turcares declared at it: Manilla lost and paid.</p>
			<p>“The silly vanity of possessing a titled Toy got the better of Turcares. He offered to supply my mistress with play-money, on condition that I should be subservient to his pleasures. The bargain was struck in a moment. But as Manilla play’d high, and the farmer was not inexhaustible, we soon saw the bottom of his coffers.</p>
			<p>“My mistress had appointed a most brilliant party at Pharaoh. All her acquaintance were invited. They were to punt with nothing under ducats. We depended on the purse of Turcares. But the morning of this great day, the rascal wrote us word that he had not a penny, and left us in the utmost consternation. However, we must extricate ourselves, and there was not a moment to be lost. We pitch’d on an old chief of the Bramins, to whom we sold at a dear rate some complaisances, which he had solicited a long time. This sitting cost him double the income of his ecclesiastical preferment.</p>
			<p>“Turcares returned notwithstanding, in a few days. He said he was excessively concerned that madam had taken him at a nonplus: he still reckon’d on her goodness. ‘Indeed you reckon ill, my dear,’ replied Manilla: ‘I cannot with decency receive you more. When you were in a condition to lend, the world knew why I admitted you: but now that you are good for nothing, you would blast my honour.’</p>
			<p>“Turcares was piqued at this discourse, and so was I: for he was perhaps the best lad in Banza. He waved his usual politeness, and gave Manilla to understand, that she cost him more than three opera girls, who would have amused him better, ‘Alas!’ cried he most mournfully, ‘why did I not stick to my little milliner? She loved me to folly. I made her so happy with a silk gown.’ Manilla, who did not relish comparisons, interrupted him in a tone, enough to make one tremble, and bade him begone in an instant. Turcares knew her, and chose rather to return peaceably downstairs, than to leap through the window.</p>
			<p>“After that, Manilla borrowed of another Bramin, who came, said she, to administer comfort in her afflictions. The holy man succeeded the farmer of the revenue, and we reimbursed him his comforts in the same coin. She lost me several times more, and ’tis well known that play-debts are the only ones that are paid among the Beau Monde.</p>
			<p>“If Manilla happens to play with good luck, she is the most regular woman in Congo. Excepting her play, she takes surprising care of her conduct: she is never heard to swear an oath: she entertains well: she pays her mercer and other tradesmen, is liberal to her servants, redeems her nicknacks sometimes, and caresses her lap dog and her husband: but thirty times a month she risks these happy dispositions and her money on an ace of spades. Such is the life she leads, and will lead: and God knows how many times yet I shall be pawn’d.”</p>
			<p>Here the Toy ceased, and Mangogul went to take repose. He was awaken’d at five in the afternoon, and went to the opera, according to a promise made to the favorite.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
