<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII: Selim at Banza</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Selim at Banza</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>From the masquerade Mangogul went immediately to take rest; but the favorite finding that she had no inclination to sleep, sent for Selim, and pressed him to continue the history of his amours. Selim obeyed, and resumed the discourse in these terms.</p>
			<p>“Madam, galantry did not fill up all my time: I snatched some moments from pleasure, which I bestowed on serious occupations; and the intrigues in which I was embarked, did not prevent my learning fortification, riding, fencing, music and dancing; observing the customs and arts of the Europeans, and studying their politicks and military art. On my return to Congo, I was presented to the Emperor, grandfather to the Sultan, who granted me an honourable post in his troops; and I soon was made one of all the parties of the prince Erguebzed, and consequently concerned in the adventures of pretty women. I was acquainted with some of all nations, ages, and conditions, and found very few cruel; whether it was that my rank dazzled them, that my prattle pleased them, or my person struck them. At that time I had two qualities, with which a rapid progress is made in love-affairs; assurance and presumption.</p>
			<p>“At first I dealt among the women of quality. I took them in the evening in the circle, or at play at the Manimonbanda’s: I passed the night with them, and we hardly knew each other in the morning. One of the occupations of these ladies, is to procure lovers, nay, to decoy them away from their best female friends; and the other, to get rid of them. Thro’ apprehensions of ever being unprovided, while they are enjoying the sweets of one intrigue, they squint at two or three others. They possess a number of little arts to attract the man they have in view, and a thousand tricks in reserve, to disengage themselves from their present spark. This has always been, and always will be. I shall name no body; but I knew every woman of Erguebzed’s court, who had any reputation for youth and beauty; and all these engagements were formed, broken off, resumed, forgot, in less than six months.</p>
			<p>“Disgusted with that world, I passed into its antipodes. I visited the citizen’s wives, whom I found dissembling, vain of their beauty, perched on the pinacle of honour, and almost constantly beset with savage brutal husbands, or certain splaw-footed cousins, who acted the passionate lovers with their female cousins from morning till night, and were very disagreeable to me. It was impossible to be alone with these women one moment. Those animals broke in upon us perpetually, disconcerted a rendezvous; and thrust themselves into all our conversations. These obstacles notwithstanding, I brought five or six of these prattling creatures to my intended point, before I finished with any one of them. What diverted me much in their commerce, was, that they piqued themselves, on delicacy of sentiments, and I must value myself on the same; and they talk’d on that subject eno’ to make one die with laughing. Besides, they required assiduity of attendance; and in their dialect I was continually deficient in this point. They preached such correct love, that there was a necessity of renouncing it. But the worst of all was, that they had your name eternally in their mouths, and that sometimes one was obliged to appear in public with them, and incur all the ridicule of a city adventure. Wherefore on a fine summer’s day I bid adieu to their shops and the whole rue <abbr>St.</abbr> Denis forever.</p>
			<p>“People had then the madness of keeping private lodges. I hired one in the eastern suburb, and there successively had some of those girls who are seen and not seen; to whom one speaks, and says not a word; and whom we discard, when tired of them. I frequently mustered a set of friends and opera actresses together, and gave little suppers, which prince Erguebzed now and then honoured with his presence. Ah! madam, I had delicious wines, exquisite cordials, and the best cook in Congo.</p>
			<p>“But nothing gave me so great amusement as an enterprise which I executed in a province remote from the capital, where my regiment was in quarters. I set out from Banza to review it; and as that was my only business, I should have been quickly back, were it not for the extravagant project to which I devoted myself. At Baruthi there was a monastery of very beautiful nuns. I was young and beardless; and I contrived how to get admission under the disguise of a widow, who sought an asylum against the dangers of the age. I ordered womens cloths to be made for me, then dressed myself, and went to offer myself at the grate of those recluses. I met with a very tender reception: they comforted me for the loss of my husband; the price of my board was agreed on, and in I went.</p>
			<p>“The apartment appointed me had a communication with the dormitory of the novices. They were very numerous, most of them young, and of a surprising bloom. I was extremely polite to them, and soon became their bosom friend. In less than eight days I was let into all the interests of the little republic, informed of the several characters, and instructed in their secret history; I received confidences of all colours, and found that detraction and calumny are not better managed by us profane mortals. I observed their rules with severity, catch’d the wheedling air and smooth canting tone: and they whispered to each other, that the community would be happy, if I took the habit.</p>
			<p>“No sooner had I thought my reputation established in the house, but I fixed upon a young virgin, who had just taken the first veil. She was an adorable nut-brown girl: she called me her mamma, and I called her my little angel. She gave me innocent kisses, and I returned very tender ones. Youth is curious: Zirziphila put me daily on the subject of matrimony, and the pleasure of husbands, and desired me to inform her: I artfully whetted her curiosity; and from question to question I led her to the practice of the lessons which I gave her. She was not the only novice that I instructed; and some young nuns came likewise to be edified in my cell. I managed the hours and meetings so dexterously, that no one interfered with another. <i xml:lang="it">Infine</i>, madam, what shall I tell you? The pious widow made a numerous progeny. But when the scandal, which caused many a secret sigh, broke out, and a council of discreet matrons met, and sent for the physician of the convent; I meditated my retreat. Wherefore in the dead of the night, when the whole house was asleep, I scaled the garden wall, and disappeared. I went to the waters of Piombino, whither the physician had sent half the convent; and there, in the habit of a cavalier, I finished the work, which I had begun under that of a widow. This, madam, is a fact which the whole empire remembers, and of which you alone know the author.</p>
			<p>“The rest of my youth,” added Selim, “was spent in the like amusements, always women, and of all sorts, seldom any mystery, a number of oaths, and no sincerity.”</p>
			<p>“But at this rate,” says the favorite, “you have never been in love?”</p>
			<p>“Psha!” replied Selim, “I thought much of love at that time; I aim’d at pleasure only, and at those women who were most likely to afford it me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But,” interrupted the favorite, “is there any pleasure without loving? What can it be, when the heart says nothing?”</p>
			<p>“Alas! madam,” rejoined Selim, “is it the heart that speaks at the age of eighteen or twenty?”</p>
			<p>“But <i xml:lang="it">infine</i>, what is the result of all these experiments? What have you pronounced on women?”</p>
			<p>“That most women have no character at all,” says Selim. “That they are most powerfully influenced by three things, interest, pleasure and vanity; that perhaps there is not one of them who is not governed by one of these passions; and that those who join all the three together, are monsters.”</p>
			<p>“As for pleasure, that I can allow them,” said Mangogul, who had just then joined the company: “though little dependance can be had on this sort of women, yet they are to be excused. When the constitution is wound up to a certain pitch, it is an unruly horse, which carries his rider over hedges and ditches; and most women are mounted astride on that beast.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis probably for that reason,” says Selim, “that the dutchess Menega calls the Chevalier Kaidar her master of the horse.”</p>
			<p>“But is it possible,” says the Sultana to Selim, “that you have not had the least adventure, in which the heart was concerned. Will your sincerity tend only to dishonour a sex which constituted your pleasures, if you were their darling. What! in so great a number of women, not one that desired, and even deserved to be beloved; that is not to be conceived.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! madam,” replied Selim, “I feel, by the readiness with which I obey you, that years have not weakened the empire of a lovely woman over my heart. Yes, madam, I have loved like other folks. You desire to know all; I am going to tell all, and you will judge if I have performed a lover’s part in all the forms.”</p>
			<p>“Are there any travels in this part of your history?” says the Sultan. “No, prince,” replied Selim. “So much the better,” says Mangogul, “for I find no propensity to sleep.”</p>
			<p>“For my part,” rejoined the favorite, “Selim will allow me to take a little rest.”</p>
			<p>“Let him go to bed likewise,” says the Sultan; “and while ye both are reposing, I will interrogate Cypria.”</p>
			<p>“But, prince,” answered Mirzoza, “your highness does not reflect, that that Toy will lead you into a string of voyages without end.”</p>
			<p>The African author informs us in this place, that the Sultan, struck with Mirzoza’s observation, took care to provide a most powerful antihypnotic. He adds, that Mangogul’s physician, being his intimate friend, had given him the prescription, and that he had put it in to the preface of his book: but of that preface there remains no more than; the three last lines, which are as follow.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Take of⁠—</p>
				<p>of⁠—</p>
				<p>of⁠—</p>
				<p>of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mariamne</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Paysan Par</i>, four pages.</p>
				<p>of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Egaremens du Coeur</i>, one sheet.</p>
				<p>of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions</i>, twenty five lines and a half.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
