<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication">
			<p>
				<b>To Zima.</b>
			</p>
			<p>Zima, embrace the moment. The Aga Narkis entertains your mother, and your governess is upon the watch in a balcony for your father’s return: take, read, fear nothing. But even though the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Bijoux indiscrets</i> should be found behind your toilet, do you think it would be a matter of wonder? No, Zima, no; it is well known, that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Sopha</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tanzai</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions</i> have been under your pillow. Do you hesitate still? Know then, that Aglaé has not disdained to set her hand to the work, which you blush to accept. “Aglaé,” say you, “the sober Aglaé!”⁠—The same. While Zima was straying with, or perhaps contriving how to get rid of the young Bonza Alleluia; Aglaé amused herself innocently, by relating to me the adventures of Zaide, Alphana, Fannia, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—furnished me with the few strokes, which please me in the history of Mangogul, revised it, and pointed me out the means of making it better: for if Aglaé is one of the most virtuous and least edifying women in Congo; she is likewise one of the least jealous of wit, and one of the most witty. Can Zima now think, that it becomes her to play the scrupulous? Once more, Zima, take, read, read all; even without excepting the narrative of the <em>Rambling Toy</em>, which may be interpreted to you, without any expense to your virtue, provided the interpreter be neither your spiritual director nor your lover.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
